This section contains two separate sub-sections, on preservation and sustainability. The AHRC's definitions of these terms are distinct and not interchangeable.

    Preservation means the storage of a project’s digital outputs for a period beyond the end of funding
    Sustainability refers to your plans for ensuring that digital outputs remain publicly accessible and usable for a period beyond the end of funding. In the case of on-line resources this means keeping the full on-line system working.  

Preservation of outputs means that they are potentially re-usable, but not necessarily immediately accessible or easy to use. For present purposes digital outputs include all primary research data (derived or ‘born digital’), programming code and related documentation produced by the project and essential to the project’s research outcomes.

You should clearly indicate in this section which digital outputs of your project will be preserved and which sustained and for what length of time. It is essential to appreciate that there is a cost for preservation and an even greater one for sustainability that will go on beyond the lifetime of the grant. You should note that AHRC awards cannot cover any direct costs relating to the expenditure occurring after the end date of the grant, though they can cover appropriate costs of preparation and ingest of digital outputs that are incurred within the funding period. It is important therefore to consider and outline how the costs incurred after the end of the grant will be funded.

If your project will produce digital outputs that you do not consider worth preserving or sustaining, you should explain and justify this in this section. As a matter of good practice, however, projects are normally expected at least to preserve digital outputs essential to their research outcomes, with a view to supporting these outcomes if necessary, and to the potential value of the outputs for other researchers.

The AHRC requires a minimum of three years after the end of project funding for both preservation and sustainability, but in many, if not most, cases a longer period will be appropriate. This should be decided on the basis of the significance of the outputs in the context of your project, their potential value to the larger research community, and the cost of developing them within the project award. Reviewers will need to be assured that the proposed period of preservation or sustainability represents value for money.

The AHRC normally expects digital outputs that are preserved and/or sustained to be freely available to the research community. Where sustainability plans are made, you must provide justification if you do not envisage open public access for data and open-source status for software that you create or develop; you may make a case for charging for or otherwise limiting access and it will be considered on its merits, but the default expectation is that access will be open. Where digital outputs are preserved but not sustained, the expectation is that they should be freely available on request, but again a case may be put forward to the contrary and will be considered on its merits.

Finally, when completing this section, you should consider the opportunities for re-use of your outputs  if appropriate by other resources and web services with a view to increasing their overall impact within the academic and non-academic communities. Examples of opportunities for re-use might include linked datasets for integrated searching across multiple research resources or ingestion into systems and services which are able to add further value and reach new audiences.